-   [Discussion](#discussion)
    -   [Impacts of severe droughts on rear-edge
        populations](#impacts-of-severe-droughts-on-rear-edge-populations)
    -   [Oaks show high resilience in response to recent drought
        events](#oaks-show-high-resilience-in-response-to-recent-drought-events)
    -   [Site environment shapes differential sensitivity to climate and
        drought of rear-edge oak
        populations](#site-environment-shapes-differential-sensitivity-to-climate-and-drought-of-rear-edge-oak-populations)
    -   [Land-use legacy effects shape distribution and sensitivity to
        climate change of read-edge oak
        populations](#land-use-legacy-effects-shape-distribution-and-sensitivity-to-climate-change-of-read-edge-oak-populations)
    -   [References](#references)

Discussion
==========

Impacts of severe droughts on rear-edge populations
---------------------------------------------------

Our findings show that recent severe drought events, such as 2005 and
2012, provoked a reduction in greenness and especially in the growth of
*Q. pyrenaica*. During the 2005 drought, one of the worst drought events
recorded in the Iberian Peninsula (García-Herrera et al. 2007), we found
a browning of the *Q. pyrenaica* forests, but no changes in EVI
standardized anomalies were recorded for 2012, which can be explained
because 2012 drought event was a winter-drought (Trigo et al. 2013).
Tree-growth was also affected by drought as evidenced by the reduction
in detrended tree-rings (RWI) during the most severe drought events
(Figure 5). The decline in growth observed in our study sites is
consistent with several works reporting tree-growth reductions for
Mediterranean tree species during severe droughts, particularly for 2005
(*e.g.* Sánchez-Salguero et al. 2013, Camarero et al. 2018, Gazol et al.
2018).

Oaks show high resilience in response to recent drought events
--------------------------------------------------------------

Although 2005 and 2012 were two severe droughts recorded for the south
of the Iberian Peninsula (García-Herrera et al. 2007, Trigo et al. 2013,
Vicente-Serrano et al. 2014b) (Appendix S3), we found a positive trend
for vegetation greenness of the forests of *Q. pyrenaica* located in
their rear edge. Our results agree with those obtained by previous works
using other remote-sensing vegetation indices (Pérez-Luque et al. 2015,
Alcaraz-Segura et al. 2016), which suggests an increase in primary
productivity during the last years for rear-edge populations of this
species.

For tree-growth, a similar positive trend was observed in the last
decades, particularly for the southern high-elevation site (CA-High,
Figure 4). This result differs from those previous reported for *Q.
pyrenaica* along their distribution range (Gea-Izquierdo et al. 2013,
Gea-Izquierdo and Cañellas 2014). Gea-Izquierdo and Cañellas (2014)
found a general decline in the growth of this species since the 1970s,
particularly sharp for populations located in their dry-edge. This
decline trend in growth have also been oberved for other tree species
located in their rear-edges (*e.g.* Sánchez-Salguero et al. 2012, 2017,
Dorado-Liñán et al. 2017). Furthermore, growth projections have
forecasted a decrease in productivity for *Q. pyrenaica* that would
increase vulnerability of this species to climate warming at the dry
edges locations (Gea-Izquierdo et al. 2013). However, our results for
similar locations have revealed a recovery in tree-growth for the last
years (Figure 4). In addition, a similar positive trend in BAI for the
last years, has been reported for another *Q. pyrenaica* population of
the Sierra Nevada (Rubio-Cuadrado et al. 2018).

Aunque los valores de resiliencia (*Rs*) para el greenness y el
tree-growth fueron inferiores o muy cercanos a 1, observamos en ambas
variables, una mayor resiliencia tras la sequía de 2012 (Figure 3). La
sequía de 2012, que fue mas severa e intensa que la registrada en 2005
(Appendix S3), ocurrió durante el invierno de 2012 (Trigo et al. 2013),
lo cual puede explicar un menor efecto, sobre todo en el greenness de
*Q. pyrenaica*. Por otro lado, al analizar la resiliencia del
tree-growth para otros eventos de sequía (long-term perspective),
observamos como estas poblaciones presentan altos valores de
resiliencia. Como muestran nuestros resultados, los mayores valores de
resiliencia fueron registrados para dos de los eventos mas severos de
sequía (1995 y 1999), con valores de resiliencia por encima de 1.2 en
ambos eventos (Appendix S5).

Desde una perspectiva a largo plazo, es destacable el hecho de que las
poblaciones de *Q. pyrenaica* en Sierra Nevada, aún habiendo sufrido
varios eventos de sequía severa, presentan altos valores de Recovery y
de Resiliencia, tal y como indican nuestros resultados (Appendix S5).
Las poblaciones situadas en su rear edge viven en estrechos márgenes
ambientales y pequeños variaciones en las condiciones ambientales pueden
provocar que las restricciones ambientales sean mas severas (Hampe and
Petit 2005). Así, frecuentemente se asume una alta vulnerabilidad a la
sequía de las poblaciones situadas en su dry rear-edge (Martínez-Vilalta
2018), tal y como se ha visto para *Q.pyrenaica* (Gea-Izquierdo and
Cañellas 2014) y para otras especies (citas). Sin embargo, algunos
estudios están demostrando que esto no es siempre así (ver por ejemplo
Cavin and Jump 2017, Granda et al. 2017), tal y como sugieren nuestros
resultados, con altos valores de resiliencia para poblaciones de *Q.
pyrenaica* situadas en su rear-edge.

Algunos autores han apuntando que cuando se estudian poblaciones del
rear-edge, hay que poner atención a la forma en la que se define la
marginalidad, esto es, si se define atendiendo a criterios geográficos,
climáticos, o según otros factores ecológicos (Martínez-Vilalta 2018).
En este sentido, los altos valores de resiliencia a los eventos de
sequía que hemos observado, podrían sugerir que las poblaciones de *Q.
pyrenaica* en Sierra Nevada están situados en un rear-edge geográfico,
pero no climático. Esto último se ve reforzado por el hecho de que
Sierra Nevada is considered a glacial refugia for deciduous *Quercus*
species (Brewer et al. 2002, Olalde et al. 2002, Rodríguez-Sánchez et
al. 2010); además las poblaciones de *Q. pyrenaica* en Sierra Nevada
presentan una alta resiliencia genética (Valbuena-Carabaña and Gil 2013,
2017).

Site environment shapes differential sensitivity to climate and drought of rear-edge oak populations
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Our results showed differences for greenness and tree-growth between
northern and southern oak populations (Table 3). Las poblaciones del
norte, que presentan condiciones mas secas (Tabla 1), se vieron mas
afectadas por los eventos de sequía. For instance, the northern site
showed more negative EVI standardized anomalies (higher browning
intensity) than the southern sites during the 2005 drought event (Figure
2). In addition, the stronger correlations of tree-growth with SPEI
(Hydrological and summer) observed for northern site (Figure 6), can be
interpreted as higher sensitivity to drought of a drier site
(Gea-Izquierdo and Cañellas 2014).

Moisture availability has been reported as the most limiting factor
driving radial growth of *Q. pyrenaica* along their distribution range
in Iberian Peninsula (Gea-Izquierdo and Cañellas 2014). We found a
singnificant positive relation between precipitacion (hydrological year
and previous December) and tree-growth (Figure 6a). Our results are
consistent with previous studies highlighting the influence of
precipitation on tree-ring growth (Roig et al. 2009, Gea-Izquierdo and
Cañellas 2014, Gea-Izquierdo et al. 2014, González-González et al. 2014,
Leal et al. 2015, Camisón et al. 2016, García-González and Souto-Herrero
2017)

A striking result is the difference for tree growth between sites
(Figure 4). The trees of CA-High site, which are located around 1900 m.
*a.s.l.* and representing the upper limit of the treeline of the species
in this southernmost location (Pérez-Luque 2011), showed higher BAI than
those located at low-elevations sites (CA-Low and SJ) (Figure 4). This
is especially interesting for southern sites, which are very close to
each other. Our results are consistent with previous findings that
pointed out tree growth and tree responses to drought are site-dependent
(e.g. soil features, tree competence, etc.) (e.g. Babst et al. 2013,
Vicente-Serrano et al. 2014a), particularly for rear-edge populations
(Cavin and Jump 2017, Dorado-Liñán et al. 2017).

When we explored the chracteristics of the southern sites, we firstly
observed a difference in elevation. Bhuyan et al. (2017a), in a recent
work across the European continent, found a clearly effect of elevation
on the resistance to drought of several tree-species, where stands
located at higher elevations were less drought sensitive. The higher
values of tree growth that we observed in CA-High site could be related
with lower water stress at high-elevation sites, since moisture
availability is a key factor limiting tree growth for *Q. pyrenaica*
(Gea-Izquierdo and Cañellas 2014). In fact, the differences in available
water of soils could explain our results. Cobo-Díaz et al. (2017), in a
work analyzing the variation of the microbiota along an elevational
gradient within this location, found higher values of available water of
the forest soils located on high elevation compared with those located
at low elevations. In this sense, a remarkable observation is the
presence of traditional irrigation ditches which could provide an
additional water supply. In most of the high-mountain watersheds of
Sierra Nevada, there is a system of historical irrigation channels, know
as *acequias de careo*, that was used since Middle Age to cultivated
these valleys (Martín-Civantos 2014, Martín-Civantos and Bonet-García
2016). These ditches run through the hillsides of valleys releasing
water through several points that filtrate the water to recharge the
aquifer and then irrigates the foot of the slopes (Martín-Civantos 2014,
Jódar et al. 2017). The network of traditional ditches present in one of
our sampling site (Cáñar) was recentlty described, with detailed
information about water use (Ruiz-Ruiz 2017) and its hydrological
functioning (Martín-Montañés et al. 2015). There is a ditch (*Acequia de
la Era Alta*) located uphill the CA-High site, which functions from
March to June (Ruiz-Ruiz 2017). It brings water from snowmelt and from a
nearby stream, soaking the *Q. pyrenaica* forests. This traditional
system could supply an extra of water that could be used by the trees
located downstream of these channels. This extra of water is
particularly important for trees of this dry-rear edge and could explain
the higher values of BAI for trees located in CA-High site.

Land-use legacy effects shape distribution and sensitivity to climate change of read-edge oak populations
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Although our sampled sited showed similar tree competence levels (Table
1), the review of historical documents showed that la historia de manejo
humano ha sido diferente para cada sitio. Different values of
tree-growth were observed between populations and for different
elevations within southern location (Figure 4). Low-elevation sites
showed lower BAI values than higher-elevation site. A reason that could
explain these results is the different degree of anthropic impact
related to elevation. Los bosques situados a mas elevación presentan
menor presión antrópica que los localizados a menor altitud, por el
simple hecho de que estos últimos están mas accesibles. During the last
decades, the rural abandonment has lead an decrease of anthropic
pressures on the high-elevations zones of Mediterranean mountains
(INLCUIR CITA).

comentario –&gt; Aqui pretendo incluir la idea que hablamos en su
momento. Quizá están creciendo donde les están dejando crecer (menor
impacto antrópico en las zonas mas altas, al menos en los últimos años
-abandono de zonas rurales?-) He ralizado una revisión de trabajos que
utilicen dendro de Q. pyrenaica para ver si existe una relación entre la
edad de las cronos con la elevación.

-   Son bosques relativamente jóvenes comentaio –&gt; Aquí me falta
    desarrollar este apartado algo más incluyendo cosas de los
    documentos históricos (la minería, etc, etc) Los tres sitios
    mostraron una reducción en los valores de BAI durante las sequías de
    1995 y 2005, y menos evidente para el año 2012 (Figure 5). La
    población del norte (SJ) mostró una gran liberación en torno a 1945
    fruto quizá de cortas asociadas a la actividad minera de la zona.
    Asimismo, esta población mostró un marcado descenso en BAI durante
    el periodo 1986 - 1999.

Climatic drivers are key factors determining the growth of tree species,
especially at the rear edge of their distribution. Para *Q. pyrenaica*
se ha visto que moisture availability es el factor limitante que
determina el crecimiento en las poblaciones situadas en su rear edge
(Gea-Izquierdo and Cañellas 2014), pero para otras especies (*i.e.*
*Pinus nigra*, *P. sylvestris*) la temperatura tiene mas peso que la
disponibilidad de agua (<span class="citeproc-not-found"
data-reference-id="Matias2017">**???**</span>, Herrero et al. 2013).
Pero es importante considerar además la historia de manejo que han
tenido esos bosques a la hora de la forest management (Doblas-Miranda et
al. 2017, Peñuelas et al. 2017), ya que, como observamos en nuestros
resultados puede condicionar el crecimiento y la resiliencia de las
especies.

En este sentido, sabemos que estos robledales han estado sometido a
muchos ciclos de coppiccing, lo que podrían haber reducido su diversidad
genética, y por tanto su resiliencia. Pero varios trabajos
(Valbuena-Carabaña and Gil 2013, 2017) han encontrado que esta especie
en su límite de distribución sur, muestra unos altos niveles de
resiliencia (en este caso genética).

Methodological approach

comentario: tengo que rematar este apartado.

Vegetation reflects the environmental conditions, and the effects of
drought on vegetation can be observed using information from several
methodological approaches (see Norman et al. 2016 for a review). Several
works revealed the utility of remote-sensing (*e.g*. Zhang et al. 2013,
AghaKouchak et al. 2015) and of the dendrochronology (*e.g.* Eilmann and
Rigling 2012, Bhuyan et al. 2017a) to quantify the drought impacts on
vegetation at different spatial and temporal scales, but to our
knowledge the combination of both approaches is scarce (Vicente-Serrano
et al. 2013, 2016, Bhuyan et al. 2017b, Wu et al. 2018). Estos trabajos
han observado que existe de forma general a positive relationship
between vegetation indices derived from remote sensing and annual tree
growth (Vicente-Serrano et al. 2016, Bhuyan et al. 2017b, Gazol et al.
2018).

Aunque existen algunos trabajos que han utilizado RWI y remote sensing
nuestra aproximación (creo) es interesante, sobre todo porque la
aplicamos al estudio de poblaciones que están en su límite de
distribución (rear-edge) (Jump et al. 2010). Los estudios sobre
poblaciones localizadas en el rear-edge de su distribución requieren de
aproximaciones multidisciplinares que analicen la respuesta de las
poblaciones al cambio climático y su resiliencia utilizando diferentes
aproximaciones metodológicas, por ejemplo combinando dendro y remote
sensing (Jump et al. 2010).

-   Nosotros aqui utilizamos la combinación de técnicas de remote
    sensing con dendro para analizar la vulnerabilidad de poblaciones
    de Q. pyrenaica situadas en su reaar edge frente a los eventos de
    sequía.

-   Hemos encontrado diferencias en cuanto a la resiliencia utilizando
    RS y RWI. Diferente sensibilidad de satélite frente a los datos de
    campo. Esto también se ha observado en Gazol et al. (2018), que
    analizaron la resiliencia a la sequia de 1986, 1994-1995, 1999 y
    2005, usando RS y TR. Encontraron que los datos de TR son mas
    sensibles para la resiliencia del bosque a la sequía que los datos
    de RS

-   De hecho, Jump et al. (2010) recomienda el uso de una aprox combinda
    de dendro, remote sensing y ground-based assessment para analizar
    los efectos del cambio global en las poblaciones situadas en el rear
    edge.

-   La utilización de datos de tree-ring nos permite contextualizar los
    resultados obtenidos con remote sensing, ya que los datos de
    tree-ring reflejan anomalías en el crecimiento de los árboles
    (inducidas por clima o por disturbances) durante décadas o siglos
    (<span class="citeproc-not-found"
    data-reference-id="Babst2017">**???**</span>) (… Combined analyses
    may also allow climate-induced variability in forest growth to be
    disentangled from that driven by community-level ecological
    processes. )

-   Nota from Jump et al. (2010): Whilst lower resolution data, whether
    from remote sensing or ground-based monitoring, can inform on
    widespread regional changes in forest condition, these data are
    often not adequate for monitoring changes occurring at equatorial
    range margins owing to their complex distribution and/or
    topographical variability. In such regions, targeted collection of
    high-resolution data is necessary in order to identify currently
    occurring changes and predict the magnitude and spatial distribution
    of future decline. (Jump et al. 2010)

References
----------

AghaKouchak, A., A. Farahmand, F. S. Melton, J. Teixeira, M. C.
Anderson, B. D. Wardlow, and C. R. Hain. 2015. Remote sensing of
drought: Progress, challenges and opportunities. Reviews of Geophysics
53:452–480.

Alcaraz-Segura, D., A. Reyes, and J. Cabello. 2016. Changes in
vegetation productivity according to teledetection. Pages 142–145 *in*
Z. R., P.-L. A.J., B. F.J., B.-A. J.M., and A. R., editors. Global
change impacts in sierra nevada: Challenges for conservation. Consejería
de Medio Ambiente y Ordenación del Territorio. Junta de Andalucía.

Babst, F., B. Poulter, V. Trouet, K. Tan, B. Neuwirth, R. Wilson, M.
Carrer, M. Grabner, W. Tegel, T. Levanic, M. Panayotov, C. Urbinati, O.
Bouriaud, P. Ciais, and D. Frank. 2013. Site‐ and species‐specific
responses of forest growth to climate across the european continent.
Global Ecology and Biogeography 22:706–717.

Bhuyan, U., C. Zang, and A. Menzel. 2017a. Different responses of
multispecies tree ring growth to various drought indices across europe.
Dendrochronologia 44:1–8.

Bhuyan, U., C. Zang, S. M. Vicente-Serrano, and A. Menzel. 2017b.
Exploring relationships among tree-ring growth, climate variability, and
seasonal leaf activity on varying timescales and spatial resolutions.
Remote Sensing 9:526.

Brewer, S., R. Cheddadi, J. de Beaulieu, and M. Reille. 2002. The spread
of deciduous quercus throughout europe since the last glacial period.
Forest Ecology and Management 156:27–48.

Camarero, J., A. Gazol, G. Sangüesa-Barreda, A. Cantero, R.
Sánchez-Salguero, A. Sánchez-Miranda, E. Granda, X. Serra-Maluquer, and
R. Ibáñez. 2018. Forest growth responses to drought at short- and
long-term scales in spain: Squeezing the stress memory from tree rings.
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution 6:9.

Camisón, Á., F. Silla, and J. J. Camarero. 2016. Influences of the
atmospheric patterns on unstable climate-growth associations of western
mediterranean forests. Dendrochronologia 40:130–142.

Cavin, L., and A. S. Jump. 2017. Highest drought sensitivity and lowest
resistance to growth suppression are found in the range core of the tree
fagus sylvatica l. Not the equatorial range edge. Global Change Biology
23:362–379.

Cobo-Díaz, J. F., A. J. Fernández-González, P. J. Villadas, N. Toro, S.
G. Tringe, and M. Fernández-López. 2017. Taxonomic and functional
diversity of a quercus pyrenaica willd. Rhizospheric microbiome in the
mediterranean mountains. Forests 8:390.

Doblas-Miranda, E., R. Alonso, X. Arnan, V. Bermejo, L. Brotons, J. de
las Heras, M. Estiarte, J. Hódar, P. Llorens, F. Lloret, F.
López-Serrano, J. Martínez-Vilalta, D. Moya, J. Penuelas, J. Pino, A.
Rodrigo, N. Roura-Pascual, F. Valladares, M. Vilà, R. Zamora, and J.
Retana. 2017. A review of the combination among global change factors in
forests, shrublands and pastures of the mediterranean region: Beyond
drought effects. Global and Planetary Change 148:42–54.

Dorado-Liñán, I., L. Akhmetzyanov, and A. Menzel. 2017. Climate threats
on growth of rear-edge european beech peripheral populations in spain.
International Journal of Biometeorology 61:2097–2110.

Dorado-Liñán, I., I. Cañellas, M. Valbuena-Carabaña, L. Gil, and G.
Gea-Izquierdo. 2017. Coexistence in the mediterranean-temperate
transitional border: Multi-century dynamics of a mixed old-growth forest
under global change. Dendrochronologia 44:48–57.

Eilmann, B., and A. Rigling. 2012. Tree-growth analyses to estimate tree
species’ drought tolerance. Tree Physiology 32:178–187.

García-González, I., and M. Souto-Herrero. 2017. Earlywood vessel area
of quercus pyrenaica willd. Is a powerful indicator of soil water excess
at growth resumption. European Journal of Forest Research 136:329–344.

García-Herrera, R., E. Hernández, D. Barriopedro, D. Paredes, R. M.
Trigo, I. F. Trigo, and M. A. Mendes. 2007. The Outstanding 2004/05
Drought in the Iberian Peninsula: Associated Atmospheric Circulation.
Journal of Hydrometeorology 8:483–498.

Gazol, A., J. J. Camarero, S. M. Vicente-Serrano, R. Sánchez-Salguero,
E. Gutiérrez, M. de Luis, G. Sangüesa-Barreda, K. Novak, V. Rozas, P. A.
Tíscar, J. C. Linares, N. Martín-Hernández, E. Martínez del Castillo, M.
Ribas, I. García-González, F. Silla, A. Camisón, M. Génova, J. M. Olano,
L. A. Longares, A. Hevia, M. Tomás-Burguera, and J. D. Galván. 2018.
Forest resilience to drought varies across biomes. Global Change
Biology:1–16.

Gea-Izquierdo, G., and I. Cañellas. 2014. Local climate forces
instability in long-term productivity of a mediterranean oak along
climatic gradients. Ecosystems 17:228–241.

Gea-Izquierdo, G., L. Fernández-de-Uña, and I. Cañellas. 2013. Growth
projections reveal local vulnerability of mediterranean oaks with rising
temperatures. Forest Ecology and Management 305:282–293.

Gea-Izquierdo, G., B. Viguera, M. Cabrera, and I. Cañellas. 2014.
Drought induced decline could portend widespread pine mortality at the
xeric ecotone in managed mediterranean pine-oak woodlands. Forest
Ecology and Management 320:70–82.

González-González, B. D., V. Rozas, and I. García-González. 2014.
Earlywood vessels of the sub-mediterranean oak quercus pyrenaica have
greater plasticity and sensitivity than those of the temperate q.
Petraea at the atlantic–mediterranean boundary. Trees 28:237–252.

Granda, E., A. Q. Alla, N. A. Laskurain, J. Loidi, A. Sánchez-Lorenzo,
and J. J. Camarero. 2017. Coexisting oak species, including rear-edge
populations, buffer climate stress through xylem adjustments. Tree
Physiology.

Hampe, A., and R. J. Petit. 2005. Conserving biodiversity under climate
change: The rear edge matters. Ecology Letters 8:461–467.

Herrero, A., A. Rigling, and R. Zamora. 2013. Varying climate
sensitivity at the dry distribution edge of pinus sylvestris and p.
Nigra. Forest Ecology and Management 308:50–61.

Jódar, J., J. A. Cabrera, S. Martos-Rosillo, A. Ruiz-Constán, A.
González-Ramón, L. J. Lambán, C. Herrera, and E. Custodio. 2017.
Groundwater discharge in high-mountain watersheds: A valuable resource
for downstream semi-arid zones. The case of the bérchules river in
sierra nevada (southern spain). Science of The Total Environment
593-594:760–772.

Jump, A. S., L. Cavin, and P. D. Hunter. 2010. Monitoring and managing
responses to climate change at the retreating range edge of forest
trees. Journal of Environmental Monitoring 12:1791–1798.

Leal, S., F. Campelo, A. L. Luz, M. F. Carneiro, and J. A. Santos. 2015.
Potential of oak tree-ring chronologies from southern portugal for
climate reconstructions. Dendrochronologia 35:4–13.

Martín-Civantos, J. M. 2014. Mountainous landscape domestication.
Management of non-cultivated productive areas in sierra nevada
(granada-almeria, spain). European Journal of Post-Classical
Archaeologies 4:99–130.

Martín-Civantos, J. M., and M. T. Bonet-García. 2016. Historical
irrigation systems and cultural landscapes of sierra nevada. Pages 63–65
*in* Z. R., P.-L. A.J., B. F.J., B.-A. J.M., and A. R., editors. Global
change impacts in sierra nevada: Challenges for conservation. Consejería
de Medio Ambiente y Ordenación del Territorio. Junta de Andalucía.

Martínez-Vilalta, J. 2018. The rear window: Structural and functional
plasticity in tree responses to climate change inferred from growth
rings. Tree Physiology.

Martín-Montañés, C., A. Ruiz‐Constán, J. M. Martín‐Civantos, J.
Herrero‐Lantarón, J. C. Rubio‐Campos, and A. Esteban‐Álvarez. 2015.
Caracterización hidrogeológica de un sector de la cuenca del río chico
en relación con la rehabilitación de la acequia de barjas en cáñar
(granada). Pages 193–201 *in* A. Navarro, J. A. López‐Geta, G. Ramos, J.
Durán, F. Carrasco, I. Vadillo, and P. Jiménez, editors. El agua en
andalucía. El agua clave medioambiental y socioeconómica. IX simposio
del agua en andalucía (siaga 2015). IGME, Madrid, Spain.

Norman, S. P., F. H. Koch, and W. W. Hargrove. 2016. Review of
broad-scale drought monitoring of forests: Toward an integrated data
mining approach. Forest Ecology and Management 380:346–358.

Olalde, M., A. Herrán, S. Espinel, and P. G. Goicoechea. 2002. White
oaks phylogeography in the iberian peninsula. Forest Ecology and
Management 156:89–102.

Peñuelas, J., J. Sardans, I. Filella, M. Estiarte, J. Llusià, R. Ogaya,
J. Carnicer, M. Bartrons, A. Rivas-Ubach, O. Grau, G. Peguero, O.
Margalef, S. Pla-Rabés, C. Stefanescu, D. Asensio, C. Preece, L. Liu, A.
Verger, A. Barbeta, A. Achotegui-Castells, A. Gargallo-Garriga, D.
Sperlich, G. Farré-Armengol, M. Fernández-Martínez, D. Liu, C. Zhang, I.
Urbina, M. Camino-Serrano, M. Vives-Ingla, D. B. Stocker, M. Balzarolo,
R. Guerrieri, M. Peaucelle, S. Marañón-Jiménez, K. Bórnez-Mejías, Z. Mu,
A. Descals, A. Castellanos, and J. Terradas. 2017.. Forests 8.

Pérez-Luque, A. J. 2011. Análisis multivariante ambiental de los
melojares de *Quercus pyrenaica* Willd. de Sierra Nevada.
Master’s thesis, Universidad de Granada; Universidad de Granada,
Granada.

Pérez-Luque, A., R. Pérez-Pérez, F. Bonet-García, and P. Magaña. 2015.
An ontological system based on modis images to assess ecosystem
functioning of natura 2000 habitats: A case study for quercus pyrenaica
forests. International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and
Geoinformation 37:142–151.

Rodríguez-Sánchez, F., A. Hampe, P. Jordano, and J. Arroyo. 2010. Past
tree range dynamics in the iberian peninsula inferred through
phylogeography and palaeodistribution modelling: A review. Review of
Palaeobotany and Palynology 162:507–521.

Roig, F. A., D. Barriopedro, R. García-Herrera, D. Patón-Dominguez, and
S. Monge. 2009. North atlantic oscillation signatures in western iberian
tree-rings. Geografiska Annaler: Series A, Physical Geography
91:141–157.

Rubio-Cuadrado, J. J. Camarero, R. Aspizua, M. Sánchez-González, L. Gil,
and F. Montes. 2018. Abiotic factors modulate post-drought growth
resilience of scots pine plantations and rear-edge scots pine and oak
forests. Dendrochronologia 51:54–65.

Ruiz-Ruiz, F. 2017. Gestión del agua y resiliencia en los sistemas de
riego tradicionales. Una comparativa socioecológica entre los
agroecosistemas del sureste español y los del centro de méxico.
PhD thesis, University of Granada, Granada.

Sánchez-Salguero, R., J. J. Camarero, M. Dobbertin, Á. Fernández-Cancio,
A. Vilà-Cabrera, R. D. Manzanedo, M. A. Zavala, and R. M.
Navarro-Cerrillo. 2013. Contrasting vulnerability and resilience to
drought-induced decline of densely planted vs. Natural rear-edge pinus
nigra forests. Forest Ecology and Management 310:956–967.

Sánchez-Salguero, R., J. J. Camarero, E. Gutiérrez, F. González Rouco,
A. Gazol, G. Sangüesa-Barreda, L. Andreu-Hayles, J. C. Linares, and K.
Seftigen. 2017. Assessing forest vulnerability to climate warming using
a process-based model of tree growth: Bad prospects for rear-edges.
Global Change Biology 23:2705–2719.

Sánchez-Salguero, R., R. M. Navarro-Cerrillo, T. W. Swetnam, and M. A.
Zavala. 2012. Is drought the main decline factor at the rear edge of
europe? The case of southern iberian pine plantations. Forest Ecology
and Management 271:158–169.

Trigo, R. M., J. A. Añel, D. Barriopedro, R. García-Herrera, L. Gimeno,
R. Castillo, M. R. Allen, and A. Massey. 2013. The record Winter drought
of 2011-12 in the Iberian Peninsula \[in "Explaining Extreme Events of
2012 from a Climate Perspective”. \[Peterson, T. C., M. P. Hoerling,
P.A. Stott and S. Herring, Eds.\] 94:S41–S45.

Valbuena-Carabaña, M., and L. Gil. 2013. Genetic resilience in a
historically profited root sprouting oak (quercus pyrenaica willd.) at
its southern boundary. Tree Genetics & Genomes 9:1129–1142.

Valbuena-Carabaña, M., and L. Gil. 2017. Centenary coppicing maintains
high levels of genetic diversity in a root resprouting oak (quercus
pyrenaica willd.). Tree Genetics & Genomes 13:28.

Vicente-Serrano, S. M., J. J. Camarero, and C. Azorin‐Molina. 2014a.
Diverse responses of forest growth to drought time‐scales in the
northern hemisphere. Global Ecology and Biogeography 23:1019–1030.

Vicente-Serrano, S. M., J. J. Camarero, J. M. Olano, N.
Martín-Hernández, M. Peña-Gallardo, M. Tomás-Burguera, A. Gazol, C.
Azorin-Molina, U. Bhuyan, and A. E. Kenawy. 2016. Diverse relationships
between forest growth and the normalized difference vegetation index at
a global scale. Remote Sensing of Environment 187:14–29.

Vicente-Serrano, S. M., C. Gouveia, J. J. Camarero, S. Beguería, R.
Trigo, J. I. López-Moreno, C. Azorín-Molina, E. Pasho, J.
Lorenzo-Lacruz, J. Revuelto, E. Morán-Tejeda, and A. Sanchez-Lorenzo.
2013. Response of vegetation to drought time-scales across global land
biomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110:52–57.

Vicente-Serrano, S. M., J. I. López-Moreno, S. Beguería, J.
Lorenzo-Lacruz, A. Sanchez-Lorenzo, J. M. García-Ruiz, C. Azorín-Molina,
E. Morán-Tejeda, J. Revuelto, R. Trigo, F. Coelho, and F. Espejo. 2014b.
Evidence of increasing drought severity caused by temperature rise in
southern Europe. Environmental Research Letters 9:044001.

Wu, X., H. Liu, X. Li, P. Ciais, F. Babst, W. Guo, C. Zhang, V.
Magliulo, M. Pavelka, S. Liu, Y. Huang, P. Wang, C. Shi, and Y. Ma.
2018. Differentiating drought legacy effects on vegetation growth over
the temperate northern hemisphere. Global Change Biology 24:504–516.

Zhang, Y., C. Peng, W. Li, X. Fang, T. Zhang, Q. Zhu, H. Chen, and P.
Zhao. 2013. Monitoring and estimating drought-induced impacts on forest
structure, growth, function, and ecosystem services using remote-sensing
data: Recent progress and future challenges. Environmental Reviews
21:103–115.
